# Writing the first program in C language (for Linux)

In this tutorial we'll learn how to start programming in C.
We're going to write a very simple program that does nothing, because our goal is to learn how to use the essential tools.

Contents:

* Preparation
* Code
* Compilation
* Executing our program
* Conclusion


## Preparation

So we have a computer with Linux OS installed and Internet connection working.
First, we need to install a standard C compiler - `gcc`.
Open your console app and type the following command:

* on Fedora:

		sudo dnf install gcc

* on Ubuntu:

		sudo apt install build-essential

What we now have is an executable file `gcc` that we'll use later.
Now we're ready to write some code.


## Code

Open your text editor and type:

	void main()
	{
	}

Everything here will be explained later, for now we only focus on using the tools.
Save the file as `p1.c`.


## Compilation

Now we need to transform human-readable C code into an executable file - a file that our OS can execute.
The C compiler we've already installed earlier serves this purpose.

In your console app type:

	gcc p1.c -o p1

Normally, this command doesn't print anything;  if it prints an error - something went wrong.
Now we have an executable file that we can run.


## Executing our program

Type:

	./p1

Our program doesn't print anything and just exits after we've executed it.


## Conclusion

Congratulations, you've written the first C program!
What we've learned here is that programming in C consists of 3 steps:

1. Write code.
2. Compile code into a binary file.
3. Execute binary file.

The next article explains more in details.
