# Debugging a C program

Contents:

* What is a debugger?
* Add a bug
* Compile with debugging info
* Reproduce the problem under debugger
* Find the problem
* Fix
* Conclusion
* More useful gdb commands

## What is a debugger?

We know how to write a small C program, compile it and run the executable file so that we can see the result of our program.
But what if we make a mistake in our code, and compiler couldn't warn us about it?
What if we forget something?
Actually, it happens all the time to all programmers because we're humans - we make mistakes and it's perfectly normal.
Programming is not that kind of a process where we can write the code once and then it just starts working without any problem.
Programming is a dynamic process with constant try-fail-improve cycle.
And through hard work and hundreds of these small cycles something brilliant may start coming out.
There is no shame in making a mistake - it's a shame not to be able to fix it.
So the main question is how we address these mistakes and correct them.

> In programmers' world an incorrect behaviour of a program (often caused by mistakes in code) is called a *bug* and the process of finding its cause and correcting it is called *fixing a bug* or simply *bugfixing*.

At this point we are familiar with these tools: C compiler (`gcc`), `objdump`, `git`.
But there's one essential tool missing in this list - it's a debugger.
Debugger helps us to fix programs if there's something wrong - to fix a bug in our program we must "de-bug" it;  it also helps us to understand what's going on with the program and its environment at every step that CPU takes.

> Debugger is an application that allows us to run programs so that we can deeply analyze the program's environment and control the execution at any time.

Without debugger it would be more difficult to find the mistakes we make in our code, because how can we know what's wrong exactly?  What line of code should we fix?  What was the data that the program was operating on at the time of failure?
We can answer all these questions if we're running the program under debugger (or in other words, *debugging the program*).


## Add a bug

In the previous lesson we've written a program that actually does something interesting - it prints to terminal all parameters supplied by user in command-line.
Let's sabotage our program so that it stops working normally and fails at runtime.
And while observing such behaviour we can learn how to solve the problem underneath it.

Compile this program:

	#include <FFOS/std.h>

	void main(int arg_total, char** args)
	{
		for (int i = 1;  ;  i++) { // bad code
			fflogz(args[i]);
		}
	}

We removed the `i < arg_total` statement from our `for` loop so now CPU doesn't know where to stop printing the command-line parameters.
It will try to read the parameters that don't actually exist, which will inevitably lead to a crash.
Run it:

	$ ./p5 hello
	...
	Segmentation fault (core dumped)

If you're going to write C programs for Linux you'll probably see this message many more times, so get used to it.
It's just a message shell program displays after its child process (i.e. our program) terminates abnormally.
Now we're going to find the root of this problem and fix our program.


## Compile with debugging info

By default C compiler doesn't add additional debugging information into the compiled binary file.
But without this information debugger won't be able to show our code.
That's why we order the compiler to include debug info into the resulting file by adding `-g` argument:

	gcc -g -I./ffos -I./ffbase p5.c -o p5

You may also add `-g` argument into command-line in your `ffgcc.sh`, if necessary.


## Reproduce the problem under debugger

The first step is to repeat the program failure while running under debugger so we can see where the problem really is.
We're using a standard debugger `gdb` - install it first, if it's not already installed.
We run `gdb` with `--args` parameter followed by the command-line to our program:

	gdb --args ./p5 hello

gdb displays its welcome message and is ready to work.

We start the program:

	(gdb) r
	...
	Program received signal SIGSEGV, Segmentation fault.
	0x00007ffff7f465e7 in __strlen_avx2 () from /lib64/libc.so.6

`r` is a short for `run` - in gdb we can issue commands by their first letters - it saves time.
We're not interested in what our program prints before failing - it's the 2 last lines that matter.
We've reproduced the problem and we can start analyzing what's really wrong with our code.

Here, gdb tells us that while the program was running, OS sent a termination signal `SIGSEGV` to it in response to its bad behaviour.
The last line shows the address (plus function name and binary file name) of instruction where CPU stopped, or in other words, the instruction which caused the failure.
However, we didn't write `__strlen_avx2` function and `libc.so.6` isn't ours too - that's OK, we just need to "scroll the view" to our code.


## Find the problem

The first thing to do is to find out where we are right now (i.e. show the backtrace):

	(gdb) bt
	#0  0x00007ffff7f465e7 in __strlen_avx2 () from /lib64/libc.so.6
	...
	#4  0x00000000004028c9 in main (arg_total=2, args=0x7fffffffdef8) at p5.c:6

`bt` is a short for `backtrace`.
The command displays a list of frames with frame numbers as the first collumn.
Since the top frames are not related to our code, they don't interest us, so we order gdb to jump straight to our `main` frame (`#4`):

	(gdb) f 4
	#4  0x00000000004028c9 in main (arg_total=2, args=0x7fffffffdef8) at p5.c:6
	6                       fflogz(args[i]);

`f` is a short for `frame`.
gdb immediately shows our line of code at which the program crashed.
But there's nothing wrong with this line either, because the same line in the previous lesson's program works fine.
We have to remember that the code line shown in debugger at the time of program failure is not necessarily the line that needs to be fixed.
But it gives a hint to us on what's wrong: probably the parameter that we pass to `fflogz` function isn't correct.
And we can check if this is true by ordering gdb to print the text string at address `args[i]`:

	(gdb) p args[i]
	$1 = 0x21 <error: Cannot access memory at address 0x21>

`p` is a short for `print`.
gdb tells us that it can't access this address (neither could our program).
It seems that the `i` index is incorrect, we check it with:

	(gdb) p i
	$2 = 65

Isn't `65` too large for a command-line argument index in our case?
We called our program with 2 arguments (`./p5` and `hello`), but it tries to read 66-th argument which obviously doesn't exist.
The picture is much more clear now that we know that the problem is with our `i` index - it's grown too large because we didn't limit it.


## Fix

gdb helped us to find the problem and we're now ready to fix it.
But gdb is still waiting for the next command from us and our program is still running.
We order gdb to stop running our program by:

	(gdb) k
	Kill the program being debugged? (y or n) y
	[Inferior 1 (process 1234) killed]

`k` is a short for `kill`.
We don't close gdb itself just yet because we still need to check if our bugfix works.

Now we open our code and fix it by replacing:

	for (int i = 1;  ;  i++)

with:

	for (int i = 1;  i < arg_total;  i++)

We recompile our program and run it under gdb again:

	(gdb) r
	`p5' has changed; re-reading symbols.
	Starting program: p5 hello
	hello
	[Inferior 1 (process 1234) exited with code 02]

Now it works fine - it prints what it should print and then exits.
gdb also displays the status - the program exited without a termination signal from OS as before.

We may close gdb:

	(gdb) q


## Conclusion

The goal of this lesson is to understand the key idea of how debugger works and how exactly it helps us.
gdb is a powerful tool that has many features, but at the same time it's quite friendly to its user (for a console application).
As a general rule, you may always run and test your program under debugger because program failures like the one we've just fixed here happen quite often during development process.

There are front-end apps to gdb that have more convenient user interface (graphical or console such as `cgdb`).
Also, there are plugins for popular code editors that let us debug the programs straight in the code editor.
It's worth mentioning that gdb itself has another mode in which it displays the source code in fullscreen.
We may activate or deactivate this mode at any time by pressing double key combination `Ctrl+X,A`.


## More useful gdb commands

Set breakpoint at `main` function:

	(gdb) b main

Set breakpoint at line 6 of the current file:

	(gdb) b 6

Continue execution until the next C statement (until the next line, usually):

	(gdb) n

Continue execution until the next breakpoint or until the program exits:

	(gdb) c
