# C syntax with examples: Fundamentals

This section describes the most of C's functionality.
Don't try to remember all this information at once, but learn it gradually: use it as reference, not as tutorial.

Contents:

* File extensions
* Naming
* Reserved words
* Whitespace
* Comments
* Types
	* sizeof
	* Type alias with `typedef`
* Variables
	* Variables names
	* Variables and `,` operator
	* `static` variables
* Numbers
	* Integer numbers
	* Floating point numbers
* Constants
* Enumerators
* Pointers
	* Pointers and `,` operator
	* Pointer to a constant data
* Type cast
* Operators
	* Arithmetic
	* Bitwise
	* Comparison
	* Logical
	* Assignment operators
	* Arithmetic assignment operators
	* Bitwise assignment operators
	* Other
* Arrays
	* Array elements count
	* Arrays and variables storage
* Strings
	* String pointers
	* Multi-line string
	* Static string size and length
	* Wide strings


## File extensions

There are no rules on what file extensions must be used for C code.
But usually the files which we compile have `.c` extension and called *compilation units*.
The files that we include internally have `.h` extension and called *headers*.


## Naming

C is a case sensitive language meaning that if you name something `abc`, you can't reference it later by `ABC`.
The same rule applies to the reserved words - `void` is not the same as `VOID` or `Void`.
This is convenient because we don't have any naming restrictions as long as we begin our names with a capital letter, for example.


## Reserved words

### Types

	void
	char
	short
	int
	long
	float
	double
	signed
	unsigned
	const
	struct
	union
	enum
	typedef
	sizeof

### Function/variable visibility

	static
	inline
	extern

### Execution flow

	return
	goto

### Conditional

`if..else`:

	if
	else

`switch`:

	switch
	case
	default
	break

### Loops

	for
	while
	do
	continue
	break


## Whitespace

In C, whitespace (space, tab character or a new line) is required only to divide words from each other.

	void main() // whitespace after `void` is required

	void
	main() // whitespace after `void` is required

	voidmain() // INCORRECT

	return 0; // whitespace after `return` is required

	return0; // INCORRECT

Whitespace isn't necessary between operators, but we use it for readability.

	for (int i = 1;  i < arg_total;  i++) // clearer

	for(int i=1;i<arg_total;i++) // less clear

New lines aren't necessary between operators, but we use them for readability.

	// clear
	for (int i = 1;  i < arg_total;  i++) {
		fflogz(args[i]);
	}

	return 0;

	// unclear
	for (int i = 1;  i < arg_total;  i++) { fflogz(args[i]); } return 0;


## Comments

* single line comment
* multi line comment

```
int i = 0; // line comment

/*
 multi
 line
 comment
*/
i = 1;
```

## Types

Types in C define the size of words on which CPU operates.
CPU can operate on integer numbers and floating point numbers.
Integer numbers in C are either signed or unsigned.
We declare unsigned integers by adding `unsigned` before the type name.
Pointer is a special alias for signed integer which can only store an address, or in other words "point" to the data in memory rather than containing the data itself.

This table shows types and their size (for AMD64 architecture).

	Type name          | Group            | Size | Value range
	===================|==================|======|===================================
	char               | Signed Integer   | 1    | 80..7f
	short              | Signed Integer   | 2    | 8000..7fff
	int                | Signed Integer   | 4    | 80000000..7fffffff
	long long          | Signed Integer   | 8    | 8000000000000000..7fffffffffffffff
	unsigned char      | Unsigned Integer | 1    | 0..ff
	unsigned short     | Unsigned Integer | 2    | 0..ffff
	unsigned int       | Unsigned Integer | 4    | 0..ffffffff
	unsigned long long | Unsigned Integer | 8    | 0..ffffffffffffffff
	void*              | Pointer          | 8    |
	float              | Floating point   | 4    |
	double             | Floating point   | 8    |
	long double        | Floating point   | 16   |


### sizeof

We get the size of a type, variable or function using `sizeof()`.
This program prints base types and their size.

	#include <FFOS/std.h>

	void main()
	{
		fflog("char\t\t%L", sizeof(char));
		fflog("short\t\t%L", sizeof(short));
		fflog("int\t\t%L", sizeof(int));
		fflog("long long\t%L", sizeof(long long));

		fflog("void*\t\t%L", sizeof(void*));

		fflog("float\t\t%L", sizeof(float));
		fflog("double\t\t%L", sizeof(double));
		fflog("long double\t%L", sizeof(long double));
	}


### Type alias with `typedef`

We set an alias for a type using `typedef`:

	typedef unsigned long long  my_uint64;
	my_uint64 i = 0;


## Variables

We may declare a variable without setting its value immediately, or we may define a variable with an immediate value.
When declaring a variable we write its type first and then its name.

Declare a variable then set it to `0`:

	int i;
	i = 0;

Define a variable then set it to `1`:

	int i = 0;
	i = 1;

Operator `=` sets the variable's value.
Operator `;` divides C instructions from each other.

Variables are not initialized automatically, which means that they may have any random value.
It's an error to read uninitialized variables and thus it's always good to initialize to zero.


### Variables names

We can name our variables anything we want, there are no special rules in C for that.
However, it's common to use short names for local variables:

	  | Description      | Example
	==|==================|=========================
	i | array/loop index | for (int i = ...)
	n | number/count     | int n = sizeof("str")-1;
	r | return value     | int r = -1; ... return r;
	s | string           | const char* s;
	c | character        | int c = s[0];
	p | pointer          | void* p;

### Variables and `,` operator

Declare several variables using `,` operator:

	int i, a, b;

Declare and define several variables using `,` operator:

	int i, a = 1, b = 2;

### `static` variables

Define a static variable with value `0`

	static int i;

or with a different default value

	static int i = 1;

Contrary to the variables which we declare inside functions, global variables are initialized automatically to `0` by compiler.

Static variable preserves its value between calls to the function it's defined in.

	void f()
	{
		static int counter;
		counter++;
	}

	void main()
	{
		f();
		// `counter` is 1
		f();
		// `counter` is 2
	}

Static variable can also be defined in global scope.


## Numbers

### Integer numbers

Integer numbers can be in octal, decimal, hexadecimal or character coding:

	int i;
	i = 10; // decimal
	i = -10; // negative decimal
	i = 0x0a; // hexadecimal
	i = 012; // octal
	i = 'a'; // character
	i = '\n'; // special character
	i = '\x61'; // character in hexadecimal coding
	i = '\141'; // character in octal coding

Decimal numbers have a range of `0..9`.
Hexadecimal numbers start with `0x` and have a range of `0..9, a..f`.
Octal numbers start with `0` and have a range of `0..7`.
Character numbers have a range of all printable characters plus escape sequences that start with:
	* `\` followed by a single character (special character): `\n, \r, \t, \f, \b, \\, \", \'`
	* `\` followed by 3 octal numbers (octal coding)
	* `\x` followed by 2 hexadecimal numbers (hexadecimal coding)
Negative numbers start with `-`.


### Floating point numbers

	float f;
	f = 1;
	f = 1.;
	f = 0.12;
	f = .12;


## Constants

Constant values are set once and can't be changed later.

	const int i = 10;

If we try to compile this code, compiler will show an error

	const int i = 10;
	i = 20; // INCORRECT


## Enumerators

Enumerators are types that allow us to assign names for integer numbers.

	enum name {
		SUCCESS = 1,
		FAILURE = 2,
	};

Compiler automatically assigns values starting at `0` if we don't set the values explicitly.

	enum name {
		SUCCESS, // =0
		FAILURE, // =1
	};

Enums can be unnamed.

	enum { // unnamed enum
		SUCCESS,
		FAILURE,
	};

We use enum values as if they are plain integer numbers.

	int i = SUCCESS;
	i = FAILURE;


## Pointers

Pointer is a variable which doesn't contain data itself but points to data.

Define a pointer to an integer and read its value:

	int i = 0;
	int* p = &i;
	int a = *p;
	// `a` equals 0 which is the current value of `i`

Define a pointer to an integer and rewrite its value:

	int i = 0;
	int* p = &i;
	*p = 1;
	int a = i;
	// `a` equals 1 which is the current value of `i`

We use `type*` notation to declare a pointer where `type` is any C type.
We use `&` operator to get the address of a variable.
We use `*` operator to dereference pointer and get the actual value at its address.

It's common to use this style of pointer declaration:

	int *p;

It's correct not to use whitespace at all, but it's less readable:

	int*p; // BAD

We usually assign zero pointer with `NULL` constant

	void* p = NULL;

Though we can also do it using number `0`, it becomes less obvious that `p` is a pointer when reading code

	void* p;
	...
	p = 0; // BAD


### Pointers and `,` operator

When declaring several pointers with `,` operator, use this style:

	int *p1, *p2;

Be careful when declaring several pointers with `,` operator:

	int* p1, p2; // BAD: p2 is not a pointer

And never mix it with declaring non-pointer variables:

	int* p1, i; // BAD: unclear

### Pointer to a constant data

Pointers to constant data (constant pointers) are used to prevent from changing the data.

	int i = 123;
	const int *cp = &i;
	int a = *cp;
	*cp = 1; // INCORRECT: `cp` pointer is read-only


## Type cast

Implicit (automatic) cast:

	int i = 123;
	char c = i; // implicit cast

Explicit (manual) cast:

	int i = 123;
	char c = (char)i; // explicit cast

It's incorrect to cast from a pointer to integer of different size:

	void* p = 0;
	char c = p; // INCORRECT

	void* p = 0;
	char c = (char)p; // INCORRECT

The correct way to do so is to use integer type of the same size as pointer (8 for AMD64):

	void* p = 0;
	long long l = (long long)p; // explicit cast is required

It's incorrect to assign a number to a pointer without a cast

	void* p;
	p = 1; // BAD
	p = (void*)1;


## Operators

### Arithmetic

	Operator | Name        | Example
	=========|=============|===============
	+        | Add         | 1 + 2 --> 3
	-        | Subtract    | 3 - 1 --> 2
	*        | Multiply    | 2 * 3 --> 6
	/        | Divide      | 6 / 3 --> 2
	%        | Modulo      | 5 % 2 --> 1
	- (unary)| Negate      | -1 --> ffffffff

### Bitwise

	Operator | Name        | Example
	=========|=============|===============
	|        | Or          | 2 | 1 --> 3
	&        | And         | 3 & 1 --> 1
	^        | Xor         | 3 ^ 1 --> 2
	<<       | Left shift  | 4 << 1 --> 8
	>>       | Right shift | 4 >> 1 --> 2
	~        | Not         | ~1 --> fffffffe

### Comparison

	Operator | Name             | Example
	=========|==================|=================
	==       | Equal            | 2 == 1 --> false
	!=       | Not equal        | 2 != 1 --> true
	<        | Less             | 2 < 1 --> false
	>        | Greater          | 2 > 1 --> true
	<=       | Less or equal    | 2 <= 1 --> false
	>=       | Greater or equal | 2 >= 1 --> true

### Logical

	Operator | Name             | Example
	=========|==================|=====================
	!        | Not              | !(2 == 1) --> true
	&&       | And              | 1<2 && 1>2 --> false
	||       | Or               | 1<2 || 1>2 --> true

### Assignment operators

	Operator | Example              | Result of i
	=========|======================|============
	=        | int i = 1;           | 1

### Arithmetic assignment operators

	Operator | Example              | Result of i
	=========|======================|============
	+=       | int i = 1;  i += 2;  | 3
	-=       | int i = 3;  i -= 1;  | 2
	*=       | int i = 2;  i *= 3;  | 6
	/=       | int i = 6;  i /= 3;  | 2
	%=       | int i = 5;  i %= 2;  | 1
	++       | int i = 1;  i++;     | 2
	--       | int i = 1;  i--;     | 0
	++ (pre) | int i = 1;  ++i;     | 2
	-- (pre) | int i = 1;  --i;     | 0

### Bitwise assignment operators

	Operator | Example              | Result of i
	=========|======================|============
	|=       | int i = 2;  i |= 1;  | 3
	&=       | int i = 3;  i &= 1;  | 1
	^=       | int i = 3;  i ^= 1;  | 2
	>>=      | int i = 4;  i >>= 1; | 2
	<<=      | int i = 4;  i <<= 1; | 8

### Other

	Operator     | Name                          | Example
	=============|===============================|============
	;            | Divide statements             | int i;  i = 0;
	,            | Divide function parameters    | f(1, 2);
	             | Divide variable declarations  | int a, b, c;
	&            | Get address of                | int* p = &i;
	*            | Dereference pointer           | int n = *p;
	.            | Reference structure           | struct s { int i; } o;  o.i = 0;
	->           | Dereference structure         | struct s* p = &o;  p->i = 0;
	:            | Declare structure bitfield    | struct s { int b :1; };
	[]           | Get array element             | int array[4];  int i = array[0];
	()           | Function call                 | int i = f();
	             | Type cast                     | (char)i;
	             | Statement                     |
	{}           | Body                          |
	''           | Text character                |
	""           | Text string                   |
	...          | Variable function arguments   | void f(int arg, ...)
	? :          | Ternary conditional           | int i = (...) ? 1 : 0;
	sizeof()     | Get size of                   | int size = sizeof(i);
	__typeof__() | Get type of                   | __typeof__(i) n = 0;

`,` operator can also be used to divide statements like `;` does.
This feature can be used inside `for(...)`, for example.


## Arrays

Array is a set of variables of the same type under the same name.

Define an array immediately

	int numbers[3] = { 1, 2, 3 };

Define an array immediately without setting the size explicitly (compiler counts the elements for us)

	int numbers[] = { 1, 2, 3 };

Define an array with all elements set to 0

	int numbers[3] = {};

Declare an array and set its data later

	int numbers[3];
	numbers[0] = 1;
	numbers[1] = 2;
	numbers[2] = 3;

### Array elements count

When compiler controls the array size for us, we must have a method to get the number of elements.

	int a[] = { 1, 2, 3 };
	int number_of_elements_in_a = sizeof(a) / sizeof(a[0]);

The trick is to get the total size of the array and divide by the size of 1 element.

### Arrays and variables storage

By default, variables we declare inside functions are placed on stack memory allocated by OS for our process or thread.
Stack memory is limited and it can't grow.
It means that we can't create large arrays on stack, otherwise the program will crash.
Variables on stack are valid only within the scope of the current function.

Space for global variables and the variables declared `static` is reserved inside the binary file and mapped into a memory region by OS when it's starting our process.
The space is determined at compilation time and can't grow in runtime.


## Strings

A string in C is just an array of characters.

	char s[] = { 's', 't', 'r' };

It's more convenient to use `""` for static strings

	char s[] = "str";

but in this case the array `s` contains one more element - zero byte at the end:

	char s[] = { 's', 't', 'r', 0x00 };

The string enclosed in `""` is called C string or NULL-terminated string.
NULL-terminated string is convenient to pass as a function parameter with just a `char*` pointer.

Multiple parts of a string are concatenated together to form a single string:

	char s[] = "multi " "part " "string";

### String pointers

Static strings can be referenced by constant pointers

	const char* s = "str";

Despite similarity these 2 statements are different

	char s[] = "str";
	// sizeof(s) == 4

	const char* p = "str";
	// sizeof(p) == 8

`s` is an array which contains 4 characters and `=` operator actually copies the whole string into the data area allocated for `s`.
`p` is just a pointer to a static string and `=` operator assigns the address of a string to it with a single instruction.

This program proves it

	#include <FFOS/std.h>

	void main()
	{
		char s[] = { 's', 't', 'r' };
		fflog("size of s=%d", sizeof(s));

		char s2[] = { "str" };
		fflog("size of s2=%d", sizeof(s2));

		fflog("size of str=%d", sizeof("str"));

		const char* p = "str";
		fflog("size of p=%d", sizeof(p));
	}

### Multi-line string

Multi-line string is a string that contains `\n` (Line Feed) character.

	"multi\nline\nstring"

We can split a single string into separate lines in code:

	"multi\n"
	"line\n"
	"string"

Another method to do so is by using the trailing `\` character:

	"multi\n\
	line\n\
	string"

### Static string size and length

There is a difference between the size of a string and the length of a string when we use `""` static strings.
NULL-terminated strings contain one more byte at the end - a zero (or NULL) byte.
For example, a string with length 3 has the size of 4 bytes.

To get the string size we do:

	int size = sizeof("str"); // =4

To get the string length we do:

	int length = sizeof("str") - 1; // =3

### Wide strings

Wide string is an array of elements of type `wchar_t`, not `char`, and is usually in UTF-16 encoding.
`wchar_t` type size is usually 4 bytes on Linux and 2 bytes on Windows.
Wide strings are very important when writing programs for Windows, because Windows API uses UTF-16 encoding.
We can create wide strings with `L` prefix in C.

	wchar_t ws[] = { L's', L't', L'r' };

	wchar_t ws[] = L"str";

	const wchar_t* ws = L"str";

To determine the length of a static wide string, we must divide its size by the size of `wchar_t`.

	int length = sizeof(L"str")/sizeof(wchar_t) - 1; // =3
