# Printing text

Now that we are familiar with C compiler and know how to execute our binary file, we're ready to do something useful in our program.
Let's start with printing some text - such programs are often called "Hello world" programs.

Contents:
* Preparation
* Code
* Compile
* Run
* What's inside (Advanced)
* Conclusion
* Homework


## Preparation

To print text into terminal we have to ask OS to do it for us.
There are several ways to achieve it, one and the most obvious way is to use C standard library which comes together with C compiler.
C standard library provides many functions for various purposes and it might seem convenient at first.
However, the standard library's functionality has many limitations, that's why we are going to use non-standard libraries right from the start.
They are `ffbase` and `ffos`.
But because they don't come together with C compiler, we have to download them manually.


### Install git

The first thing we should do is to install a new app which every software developer must have - `git`.

* On Fedora: `sudo dnf install git`
* On Ubuntu: `sudo apt install git`
* On Windows: search for `windows download git` on the Internet.


### Install libraries

Once git is installed, we may download (or clone) the libraries:

	git clone https://github.com/stsaz/ffbase
	git clone https://github.com/stsaz/ffos


## Code

Now we're ready to write some code.

	#include <FFOS/std.h>

	void main()
	{
		fflog("This is a fine day!");
	}

* With `#include <...>` we tell the compiler that it should analyze the file `FFOS/std.h` first.
* With `fflog(...);` we actually print the text into terminal.


## Compile

Because we use non-standard libraries we should also provide the compiler with information about where it can find them.
So our compilation command now becomes a little longer:

	gcc -I./ffos -I./ffbase p3.c -o p3

Remember our `#include <FFOS/std.h>` line in code?
Without `-I` argument in command line it won't work and compiler will complain that it can't find file `FFOS/std.h`.

`-I` arguments tell the compiler to search for included files in `./ffos` and `./ffbase` directories.
What happens is:
1. Compiler processes the `#include` directive and tries to read `FFOS/std.h` file but it doesn't know exactly where it is.
2. Compiler tries to read `./ffos/FFOS/std.h` file because we used `-I./ffos` argument, and it succeeds.

Note that even if we don't use any file from ffbase directly, we still must pass `-I./ffbase` argument.
That's because ffos depends on ffbase internally - there are `#include <ffbase/...>` directives inside its files.


### Compile with a script (Optional)

Since we are not yet familiar with advanced tools used for code building, we can just create a simple script that will save us from passing too many command line arguments to `gcc`.  Type:

	echo 'gcc -I./ffos -I./ffbase $1.c -o $1' > ./ffgcc.sh
	chmod a+x ./ffgcc.sh

Now we can compile our `p3.c` file just with:

	./ffgcc.sh p3


## Run

Let's execute our binary file:

	./p3
	This is a fine day!

It works!


## What's inside (Advanced)

Let's see what's inside the binary file and how our code looks in Assembler now.

	000000000040288a <main>:
	40288a:       55                      push   %rbp
	40288b:       48 89 e5                mov    %rsp,%rbp
	40288e:       bf d8 32 40 00          mov    $0x4032d8,%edi
	402893:       b8 00 00 00 00          mov    $0x0,%eax
	402898:       e8 d9 fe ff ff          callq  402776 <ffstdout_fmt>
	40289d:       90                      nop
	40289e:       5d                      pop    %rbp
	40289f:       c3                      retq

The main thing to look at is `callq 402776 <ffstdout_fmt>`.
We can see that our code `fflog(...);` is transformed to a couple of `mov` instructions followed by `call`.
The `call` instruction tells CPU to jump to a function `ffstdout_fmt` located at address `402776`, and then jump back (i.e. return).

But why are we calling `ffstdout_fmt` and not `fflog`?
Let's open in the text editor the file `./ffos/FFOS/std.h` that we included in our code and find `fflog(` there:

	#define fflog(fmt, ...)  (void) ffstdout_fmt(fmt "\n", ##__VA_ARGS__)

As we can see, `fflog()` is in fact `ffstdout_fmt()`, it's just an alias translated by C preprocessor.

But where is our text then?
The answer is in `mov $0x4032d8,%edi` instruction - our text string is located at address `4032d8` (it's a unique ID of our string).
To ensure it's there, type:

	objdump -s p3

It will print a lot of information, but we just search for `4032`:

	...
	4032d0 f41e4000 00000000 54686973 20697320  ..@.....This is 
	4032e0 61206669 6e652064 6179210a 00000000  a fine day!.....
	...

The 1st column is the address aligned to 16 bytes.
Skip 8 bytes from address `4032d0` and we have the correct address of our text string.

So what happens under the hood:

1. During compilation process, compiler assigns `4032d8` address to our text string and replaces the call to `fflog` with `ffstdout_fmt`.
2. At runtime, CPU passes the address `4032d8` to the function `ffstdout_fmt` and jumps to its address.
3. `ffstdout_fmt` takes the input address of our string and asks OS to print it.
4. OS signals Console app which displays our string inside terminal window.
5. After `ffstdout_fmt` finishes its job, CPU returns to where we've left, i.e. the next instruction after `call`.


## Conclusion

Now we've learned how to print text into terminal from our program.


## Homework

1. Modify the text in our code inside double quotes and check if it works.
	Hint: don't use any special characters yet - just plain words.
2. Duplicate the `fflog(...);` line several times and see what happens.
3. Remove `#include <...>` line from code and get familiar with the error message that compiler displays.
