# Reading command-line arguments

We know how to print a text string which we define statically in our code.
Let's make our program more interesting by letting the user pass an arbitrary text string that we will print.
We're going to use command-line arguments for this.
This is a standard way for user to pass additional parameters to the program he executes.

Contents:

* Intro
* Printing the first command-line argument
* Printing all command-line arguments
* Explanation
* Conclusion
* Homework

## Intro

Remember how we run gcc to build our programs?

	gcc p1.c -o p1

There are 4 command-line arguments here and the first one is always the name of executable file.
Without the additional parameters gcc won't be able to understand what files we want it to compile.
This is how we, the users of gcc, execute the same binary file to build different source files for us.

Now we're implementing a similar behaviour in our small program: we will have a single binary file that can print any text that user supplies to it.


## Printing the first command-line argument

	#include <FFOS/std.h>

	void main(int arg_total, char** args)
	{
		fflogz(args[1]);
	}

We have a very simple algorithm: take the first parameter from command-line arguments and print it.
And to achieve our goal we need to learn these things:

1. How to accept command-line arguments.
2. How to read a parameter from command-line.
3. How to print a non-static text string.

### Accept command-line arguments

To use command-line arguments we must first learn how to receive them from OS.
Previously, we had this definition for the `main` function:

	void main()

but now our function has 2 parameters:

	void main(int arg_total, char** args)

The function parameters' names are `arg_total` and `args` (you may set different names for them, if you like).
`int` and `char**` are their types, but we're not interested in this right now.
* `arg_total` is the total number of command-line arguments.
* `args` is a set of text strings - command-line arguments.
By adding these function parameters in our `main` function definition we are able to use the command-line arguments the user passed to our program.

C functions, parameters and types in general will be explained later.

### Read a parameter from command-line

Suppose user calls our program this way:

	./p4 hello

The parameter that we are intereseted in is the second command-line argument.
So we must get the second element from `args`.
In C, we use `[]` to get an element from an array.
Element numbers in C array start at 0.
Therefore:
* `args[0]` (1st CL argument) is the name of our program (i.e. `./p4`) - we don't need it.
* `args[1]` (2nd CL argument) is what we need (i.e. `hello`).

C arrays will be explained later.

### Print a non-static text string

We print the user's text string with:

	fflogz(args[1])

We already know from the previous lesson that `fflogz` is a function that prints text into terminal.
We just pass the second command-line argument to this function and it prints what user has typed when calling our program.


### Run

	$ ./p4 hello
	hello

We may write anything else instead of `hello` and our program will print it.
However, if we write several words, only the first one gets printed.
And if we try to execute our program without parameters, it unexpectedly prints `(null)`.
That's because we don't check if the parameter we are trying to read actually exists.
The next version of our program solves these issues.


## Printing all command-line arguments

This code is more complicated because we use a `for` loop - we need it because we don't know in advance how many parameters user will pass to us.
C loops will be explained later.

	#include <FFOS/std.h>

	void main(int arg_total, char** args)
	{
		for (int i = 1;  i < arg_total;  i++) {
			fflogz(args[i]);
		}
	}

With `for` loop we repeat the call to `fflogz` multiple times.
We take the first argument and print it.
Then we take the second argument and print it, and so forth.
We use `arg_total` function parameter so we know when to stop reading command-line arguments.
If we don't do it, our program will try to read more parameters than user actually specified, and the program will crash.


### Run

	$ ./p4-1 hello 1 2 3
	hello
	1
	2
	3

Now we print all command-line parameters.


## Explanation

	"./p4 hello" -> shell program -> OS -> libc -> main(...)

* user types a command in terminal
* shell program receives it and asks OS to start a new process with those command-line arguments
* OS prepares to execute our program and passes the pointer to the command-line arguments via CPU register
* libc makes necessary preparations and calls our `main` function passing to us the command-line arguments
* our program begins execution with command-line arguments available as parameters in `main` function
* in our program CPU calls the `fflogz` function as many times as there are parameters in command-line

Note that our code in `main` function isn't exactly the first thing that gets executed after the process has been started.
Before `main` function is called, libc must prepare some things for us.
If we want to, we can order the compiler to set a different entry point so that we take control right from the start, but it's more difficult and we rarely need it.


## Conclusion

We've learned how to read command-line arguments.
We know how to get input parameters from user, we know how to display text to user.
The only thing that's left to learn is how to process the input in order to get something useful as the output.


## Homework

* Why do we need command-line arguments?
* Why does our first program act weirdly when executed without parameters?
* Why do we need a `for` loop in the second program?
* Why do we need `arg_total` parameter in `main` function?
