# Setting the process exit code

Contents:

* Fix
* Test
* Homework

So far we have been using this definition of `main` function:

	void main(...)
	{
		...
	}

But it's not entirely correct and here's why.

* When a program finishes its work, it asks OS to stop the associated process.
* We already know that we don't do it ourselves, because it's done automatically by libc for us.
When doing so, libc is required to pass the program's exit code to OS.
* OS in its turn passes this exit code from the child process to the parent.
That is how the parent process knows when its child has exited and what status it has set.
* However, libc doesn't know what exit code to set for us - we have to tell it.
And we can tell it by returning a code from our `main` function.

So we have to change it this way:

	int main(...)
	{
		...
		return 0;
	}

1. We replace `void` by `int` - we tell the compiler that we want to return a code from our function.
2. We add `return 0` to the end of our function's body - we tell the compiler that we return code `0`.
`0` is a standard exit code for normally finished programs.

In the previous lesson while debugging our program we saw this message from gdb after we had fixed a bug:

	[Inferior 1 (process 1234) exited with code 02]

gdb tells us that our program has set exit code to `2`.
Actually, it's just a random number that's left in CPU register after our program has finished its work, because we didn't return any code from `main` function.


## Fix

Now it's time to fix our program so it returns normal exit status:

	#include <FFOS/std.h>

	int main(int arg_total, char** args)
	{
		for (int i = 1;  i < arg_total;  i++) {
			fflogz(args[i]);
		}

		return 0;
	}


## Test

To ensure we have fixed it we run our program under gdb:

	(gdb) r
	Starting program: p6 
	[Inferior 1 (process 1234) exited normally]

Now gdb tells us that the program exited normally - our code works correctly.
There's another way to check an exit code from terminal right after our program has finished:

	$ ./p6 hello
	hello
	$ echo $?
	0


## Homework

1. Why are we required to return a code from our `main` function?
